Hello, middle school educators.
Let's take a few minutes
to talk about teaching empathy
and why it matters for students and school
culture.
Empathy is the ability to understand
and share the feelings of others.
Teaching empathy intentionally
helps students navigate relationships,
solve problems, and feel
connected to their school community.
It starts with leadership,
modeling empathy.
When leaders recognize staff
efforts, provide
emotional support, and show understanding
and daily interactions.
It sets the tone for the entire school.
Staff can then
look for intentional opportunities
to teach empathy within the curriculum,
demonstrating that caring for others
is a core part of learning.
One classroom activity
that can teach empathy
and can be incorporated
into any learning area
is an activity called Four Corners.
This activity is found in the Castle
CEO three
Signatures Playbook,
which can be found online@castle.org.
An example of
using the four corners activity
in a middle school music class would be to
place four different genres of music,
or four different musical artists,
in each of the four corners
of your classroom.
Then, ask students
to walk around to each corner
and choose the genre or artist
they prefer to listen to.
You will likely find that students will
divide themselves into the four corners.
The next step is for students
to discuss and validate with other peers
why they chose the same corner,
why they chose that genre or artist.
It could be because the type of music
reminds them of memories of a grandmother,
or they were listening to this artist
during their first kiss.
Who knows?
Students are likely
to learn more about each other
and feel a sense
of belonging in that group.
The next step is where empathy comes in.
It is
all in teaching students that it's okay
to have different preferences.
In this case, music.
The teacher can prepare students
how to be good, active listeners
and be open to hearing other perspectives.
When a student from one corner shares
their experience and other students
from other corners can accept, appreciate
and celebrate these differences,
we can create a caring
and empathetic environment.
This activity can also be done in language
arts.
By choosing four different novels
or four characters from the same novel,
or for periods of time
in history and social settings,
whatever learning area you teach,
you can incorporate this
Four Corners activity
to help teach empathy skills
in your classroom.
Teaching empathy
doesn't mean lowering expectations.
In fact, it strengthens them
when we model care while holding
students accountable for positive behavior
and academic effort, we show that empathy
and high standards go hand in hand.
Students learn
that they are capable of both kindness
and excellence,
and that meeting expectations is a part
of honoring themselves and others.
Practices and routines that reinforce
empathy are key.
Restorative circles or classroom meetings
at the middle level can help
students explore
different perspectives and solve problems.
Peer support groups or mentorship programs
build mutual care
among staff and students.
Embedding these practices makes empathy
a lived experience, not just a lesson.
By intentionally teaching empathy,
modeling in our interactions,
and embedding it in our school culture.
We help students develop social,
emotional skills,
feel valued, and contribute
positively to their community.
Thank you for creating a school
where empathy guides
interactions, decisions,
and learning every day.
Your efforts
help students grow, connect, and thrive.